# 8.3.6 TDD and proper testing (pp.212-212)

---
**Page 212**

212
CHAPTER 8
Test-driven development
these entities. However, I favor unit testing as much as possible: I do not like the tests
of unit A breaking due to a bug in unit B. I use mocks for that, and I follow all the
practices discussed in chapter 6.
 I suggest that you learn more about both schools. Both have good points, and com-
bining them makes sense. I recommend Mancuso’s 2018 talk, which elaborates on the
differences between the schools and how the approaches can be used. 
8.3.6
TDD and proper testing
Some studies show that TDD practitioners write more test cases than non-TDD practi-
tioners. However, I do not believe that the test suites generated by TDD sessions are as
good as the strong, systematic test suites we engineered in the previous chapters after
applying different testing practices. The reasoning is simple: when doing TDD, we are
not focused on testing. TDD is a tool to help us develop, not to help us test.
 Let’s revisit figure 1.4 in chapter 1. As I mentioned earlier, TDD is part of “testing
to guide development.” In other words, you should use TDD when you want your tests
to guide you through the development process. When you are finished with your TDD
sessions and the code looks good, it is time to begin the effective and systematic test-
ing part of the process I describe: change your focus to testing, and apply specifica-
tion-based testing, structural testing, and property-based testing.
 Can you reuse the tests you created during TDD in the effective and systematic
part of the process? Sure. Doing so becomes natural.
 Combining TDD and effective testing makes even more sense when both are done
in a timely manner. You do not want to TDD something and then wait a week before
properly testing it. Can you mix short TDD cycles with short systematic and effective
testing cycles? Yes! Once you master all the techniques, you will begin to combine
them. The practices I discuss in this book are not meant to be followed linearly—they
are tools that are always at your disposal. 
Exercises
8.1
This figure illustrates the test-driven development cycle. Fill in the numbered
gaps in the figure.
8.2
Which of the following is the least important reason to do TDD?
(5)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(4)


